Great, so we've got Deno installed, and
you have the extension for VS Code,
and now we're ready to write our first
program in Deno, so let's do that.
You can switch over to
the year first program branch.
I'm just gonna stay on the one
that I'm on because again,
it just mostly just resets the project.
But let's write I mean,
I know it's old and tired but
let's do it anyway, console log you knew
it was coming, console log hello world.
There we go, all right, so
this is our first Dino program.
Now one of the things
that you'll note here,
is that the console line is
underlined with a squiggly.
And you'll there's an error that says,
this cannot be compiled under isolated
modules, because bla,
okay, this is a Dino thing.
So Dino has got this TypeScript
configuration under the covers that it's
using, and it's enforcing this In
this isolated modules, all right,
what's it saying there?
What it's saying is that your code has to
be a module, in order for you to execute
it, you can still run this, with this
little squiggly arrow, it will still run.
So, to do that,
we're just gonna Dino run app.ts right,
and then you can see it
says checking file, right?
And then hello world, by the way,
if you do wanna get rid of this squiggly,
you can just do this.
If you can just you can just do export,
and then brackets like this, and then that
that makes Visual Studio Code think that
it's module and, and you're good to go.
If that squiggly line bothers you,
let's talk about what happened
here when we did this.
So we ran it, it checked the file,
and then it printed it out,
notice that if we run this again,
it does the check again.
Because made a change, but if we do
it a third time, there's no check,
okay, so what is happening?
I wanna dive into, and
take a look at what it's doing,
when it's checking these files.
The checking process in Dino,
what it's doing is
because TypeScript is a first
class citizen in Dino.
It doesn't mean that it's
a first class citizen in V8,
where the JavaScript is executed.
It still has to be JavaScript before V8
can run it, which means that Dino has to
convert the file to JavaScript,
before it can be executed.
And so when it does this,
it creates a build of your project
on your system, so actually.
You know earlier on we did the build
ourselves, where we transpile the files,
we put them in a dist directory, Dino is
actually doing that, still doing that.
It's just it's doing it for
you, and hides it from you, but
we wanna take a look at
what that looks like.
And, so in order to do that we need
to go to the Dino cash to take
a look at what's in the Dino cash.
You can get info,
about your system by running Dino info,
and that will tell you where the caches
for Dino on your system here.
So for me, that's this home birth calling
cache Dino Gen, is where the TypeScript
compiler caches I've created
a shortcut cut for this just Dino cash.
On my own machine,
which just takes me directly there, so
if we look inside this directory, there's
a depth and agenne directory, okay?
Now we don't have any dependencies, those
will go into depth folders we'll look at
later, but
let's move into this Gen directory here.
So I'm gonna go into the gen,
and then there's a file, so
let's move into the file, and then
inside of that, sorry, files a command.
So I have to CD into hold on,
let's see here, sorry,
let's go into the gen, let's CD into file.
And then there's a now what it's
doing is it's mimicking my home,
start a folder structure on my machine.
Okay, so where I am is I'm in home, right,
if you can look in that then my account,
if we look in that then Dev.
If we look inside of that, then we'll see
another folder that has my name on it,
this is the same folder structure,
that I have on my own machine.
So Dino is just,
replicating mind machines folder
structure inside of this file folder.
And if we look inside of this boom,
there's my Dino exercises project, so
let's move into that.
Oops, one too many, S's and
then inside of that, and
now we're starting to see
some interesting stuff.
So, if we look at our project here,
where's my mouse,
just to refresh ourselves on what it
actually looks like we have an app.ts.
So let's move into the exercise folder,
and you can see,
in fact let's just open this up,
and take a look at it.
What we have here, inside of this gen
folder is a couple of different things,
so we have this app.ts.js, and
this file contains look, our code, right?
There's a couple of other files in here.
One of them is this build info file,
which contains a lot of
different information about metadata,
about my project here.
And if we scroll down to the bottom,
you'll see there's an actual Ts config
that's actually like embedded
in the bottom of this file.
And then over here, this file here,
there's a hash, and what this is doing is
Dino's using all of this to identify files
on your system, and link them together.
But just know, what I'm trying to show
you here, is that when you actually run
something in Dino, a TypeScript,
this is what happens under the covers.
And we'll come back and
take a look at this later.
But this is where Dino is
putting all of these files, and
working all of its magic is
inside of this gene folder.
All right, so that's your first project,
you should feel pretty good about that,
well, let's run some TypeScript here,
which is a little bit more fun.
So let's do constant message,
which is that we did this before,
it's a string and
we'll say it's a type, a hello world.
Okay, set the value there, and
then instead of logging out the string,
let's just log out the message.
All right, I'm still in the wrong,
terminal directory,
let's move back there we go,
so Dino run apt at Ts, there we go.
All right so it checks it,
just like we did before, and
then it gives us hello world.
You can skip the checking,
so you can do Dino run,
no check app.ts and
it will just execute the file,
it won't actually check it.
Right, so like if we were to do this,
this is not valid TypeScript.
So if we run this like,
we did Dino run app.ts,
it's gonna the TypeScript
compiler is gonna fail.
Right here, but
if we do the no check like this,
it's just gonna try to execute it and
then it's gonna fail.
So, just know that you can bypass
the TypeScript compiler which you
need you may need to do from time
to time with the no check flag.
Executing JavaScripts, you can do that.
Let's just come over here, and
add a plain app.js file where
we can just do the same thing,
just console.log Hello World.
And Deno is fine with this,
it doesn't care if you use JavaScript or
TypeScript, it's fine with either one.
Of course, there's not a check step,
because there's no translation,
that needs to happen.
So, if you prefer writing JavaScript,
you're more than welcome to do that.
However, you will find that all
of Dino's examples are written
in TypeScript, and
virtually all of the libraries.
The other libraries
are written in TypeScript,
it's just a TypeScript world out there,
when you get into Dino